so
a lot of times um you know there's a lot
of stuff about mental health psychiatry
uh you know understanding
that we kind of talk about that
oftentimes
there's a lot of stuff about mental
health and psychiatry that we don't
cover very much on stream so what i'd
really like to do today is cover a
couple of other topics
so today we're going to talk a little
bit we have a great post from our
subreddit
about um
bondage domination and sadomasochism
and so we're going to take a quick look
at that and i'm going to explain some
basics about how to understand like what
is healthy and what is unhealthy okay
so let's take a look is bdsm healthy
so i'm making this post because i'm
struggling and i need some advice i've
seen a lot of conflicting evidence
surrounding bdsm kink and mental health
i i have a submissive kink and i feel
shame for engaging with it i have this
cycle where i can manage to move my mind
away from the thoughts for a while until
i feel like i can't take it anymore and
i take action
i don't know if what i'm doing is
inherently bad or just part of who i am
i've read that these kinks could be due
to childhood trauma related to sex
i can say this does map onto my
experience because i was molested as a
child i'm not sure what dr k or the
community point of view is
thanks
context i'm a heterosexual male
so this is a fantastic post once again
um for a couple of reasons the first is
that this is like i really like the way
that this person is trying to figure out
okay what is healthy what is illness
what should i kind of do about it is
this because i was traumatized and i
think these are all like really really
good important questions to consider
okay so we're gonna talk we're gonna do
kind of a quick
kind of run through of how i think about
bdsm and what is like
you know healthy and what isn't healthy
and stuff like that okay so what's an
illness what's okay
so the first thing to understand
is that
the
psychiatric attitudes
towards different kinds of sexualities
have changed a lot over time okay
and so you know like back in dsm-3 which
was maybe in the 70s
homosexuality was considered an illness
okay
and then uh was a pathology
and then like in dsm-4
um i think bdsm was considered an
illness
was also considered pathological
okay
but the interesting thing is as we've
sort of started to learn a little bit
more about bdsm
and this is one of the areas where
there's actually like very little
research
um so we don't have a lot of good we
have like very few clinical trials or i
i don't think i've ever seen a clinical
trial on like treating people with bdsm
it's mostly things like case reports and
like observational studies so we don't
really understand the science of it very
much
but in dsm-5 for example they sort of i
think they have an acknowledgement that
you know bdsm in mild forms
is okay
so let's try to understand like how do
we think about the classification of
like mental illness with bdsm
so
the first thing that so we're going to
kind of explore a couple of terms okay
so one is going to be like a paraphilia
or fetishism
okay the second is going to be um so how
do we define this so fetishism is the
use
of a
non-living object
or
um
non-genital
body part
for sexual gratification
okay so it's sort of like you know like
shoes or feet like these are things that
are not generally considered
like sexual organs and so like when
people are
sexually aroused or use these objects
for sexual gratification
then that's what we call a fetish okay
so this is what's what's kind of
interesting so there was a a a study
done in quebec
that sampled about a thousand people
okay
and what percentage of them do y'all
think had fetish fetishistic thoughts
what do y'all think
yeah so it's 50 to 60 percent
wild chat okay
so this is i i think i i think this was
not self-identified
uh people who had a fetish or paraphilia
but 50 to 60
of people were sexually aroused by a
non-living object or non-genital part of
the body okay
so about
eight to ten percent
were like intensely aroused by a
particular thing so this is when we're
probably getting into
true kind of more fetishism where like
people were like super into feet or
whatever
and by the way a quick question
do you all know oh sorry sorry this is
this is wrong i got these statistics
wrong
this is actually 45
and so here's the next question of
people who have a fetish oh no it
doesn't it's not displaying i'm lagging
so of people who have a fetish
do you guys know what percentage of them
are into feet or sexually aroused by
feet
i know the ipad's not updating it well
it's just lagging
it's actually fifty to sixty percent of
what fetish
isn't that wild
okay so we'll see if i can get this
back in but
um
i'm not desktop okay so in the meantime
okay here we go all right we're back
okay
so
so eight to ten percent ha are intensely
attracted to something okay
and then um
actually 26
tried it once
and about 3.5
do it regularly
okay so like fetishes are actually like
remarkably common
um
and so like this is not considered
really an illness okay
so then there are a couple of other
things so let's talk about you know
um yeah so 50 to 60 this is the quebec
study so once again we don't know if
this is like
this is all people or just maybe people
in quebec are super in defeat we don't
know okay
so now like if we think about you know
how do we define an illness an illness
is really defined as something that
impairs function
okay so this is where when we kind of
think about it there's like a there's
there's a you know fetishistic disorder
so what happens here is like their
fetish is so powerful
that um and we'll get to this a little
bit later their fetish is like so
dominating that for example when they
have
problems when they have sex with a
partner their partner will feel like
they actually are not having sex with
like a partner they'll feel like the
the you know the person with the fetish
is just like using them as like an
object it's kind of hard to describe
but you know with patients that i've
worked with um and we'll get to this in
a second but
you know with patients that i work with
like what the partner will describe is
like they don't feel like you know they
feel like if i'm if i'm the partner and
my partner has a fetish what i'll just
what i'll hear people say is that oh you
know the person with the fetish isn't
having sex with me they're just like
using my feet like they'll use language
like that so at that point for example
it's creating a problem within the
relationship and so therefore can be
qualified as a disorder right because
then it's impairing function other
examples of fetishistic disorder is you
know people are engaging in the behavior
in a way that like is non-consensual or
like you know impacts other people
so for example um you know like
rubbing genitalia against like people in
public places i think is called
frauderism and so that's another example
of a disorder because you know that's
something that is like sexual assault
and if you like engage in that or you
have thoughts that you really want to do
that kind of thing then it's really
going to get you in trouble and so
therefore we sort of classify it as a
disorder okay
so next thing um is so then there's also
sexual sadism disorder
so sexual sadism disorder is when
someone
is kind of defined as the recurrent and
intense arousal to inflict physical or
physiological suffering on another
person
so this is like where the intent
is to create suffering and this is going
to be really important
okay
so it's kind of interesting so if you
look at statistics the overwhelming
number of people who get diagnosed with
sexual sadism disorder are men so it's
male predominant
and um
you know there are some associations
with trauma and we'll kind of get to
that a little bit more but like
so trauma is kind of tricky let's just
talk about it now so like what's the
relationship between you know sexual
fetishes and trauma the short answer is
like we're not sure
so it does appear that people who are
traumatized
um
i think
you know there is a link between trauma
and some amount of like sexual stuff
but i don't think the i haven't reviewed
the evidence very well i don't think the
evidence is is really that
compelling yet i think there are a lot
of questions that we need to ask the
research is just poorly done so for
example you know
i haven't seen any studies that look at
healthy members of the bdsm community
and ask them how many of you were like
sexually abused
i have also haven't seen studies with
people who are who are vic victims of
like sexual abuse and ask them you know
do you are or like do you have fetishes
right so like i'm sure you all can
understand hopefully you can understand
that those are like like really
difficult questions or arguably even
like inappropriate questions to ask a
patient with trauma right like if
someone comes in and says yeah i was
sexually molested at the age of eight
and as a provider like it's it's it's
very difficult to ask a question like oh
you know what do you get sexually
aroused by like that's it's a very like
it's a hard question to ask
there's even evidence for example that
um
like there are a lot of clinical
considerations that come into play when
treating like bd people who engage in
bdsm some of them
really demonstrate like so this paper
talks about a lot of
concerns that you know practitioners
will judge people who are into bdsm
practitioners will think that bts bdsm
is a consequence of sexual trauma which
in turn is like incredibly val
invalidating right so if like if someone
comes in and has a sexual preference
like let's think about homosexuality for
a second and if i as a provider say oh
if you're gay because you were you know
assaulted like that can be like very
very like invalidating to the person so
a lot of like challenges in a clinical
setting and in a research setting for us
to really get good answers on this but
at the same time i still think we can
learn a lot today okay so the people who
are traumatized we don't the short
answer is like i don't know so i tend to
treat people with disorders and trauma
like i don't really tie the two together
i may assess them with trauma just
because i uh for trauma because i assess
all my patients for trauma but i try to
like treat them as kind of like their
own unique thing and i don't draw
correlations with trauma
there may be evidence out there i'm not
an expert on trauma and sexual fetishes
so
so be it okay so these are the two
disorders that i sort of think about
when it comes to bdsm so then we get to
actual bdsm
right so and this is where like for
example the the icd-10
which is the international
classification of diseases
actually classifies bdsm is still as a
disorder we're up to icd-11 now
and so i think it's changed a little bit
but i think generally speaking this will
classify it as a disorder
but it's kind of changing so here's the
key thing so if you're if you're
interested in bdsm and you're trying to
figure out you know do i have an illness
do i not have an illness here's the key
thing so in people who engage in healthy
bdsm relationships
they kind of inflict
pain
as a source of pleasure
i know it sounds kind of weird okay
so when i when i have an someone in my
office and they're they're asking me
literally like am i ill like what i'll
what i'll ask them is like what's the
goal
of the bdsm relationship
like so because usually what happens in
healthy bdsm relationships is you've got
a you know
a
dominator and you've got a submissive
person and they both kind of agree to
that right because like the submissive
person can get sexual gratification out
of being submissive and the dominator
gets sexual gratification out of being
dominating and so you kind of pair up
and the goal of the behaviors is to
pleasure both parties right so like i'm
going to dominate you you're going to be
the submissive or you're going to be
dominating me i'm going to be the
submissive and the goal of that like the
reason that we're engaging in this is so
that both of us can have fun
so when i really think about bdsm and
we'll get to some statistics here so it
seems like
um you know so the way i kind of
describe it is like they seek to provide
pleasure along with the pain or
humiliation or the pain or humiliation
is actually an avenue to like pleasure
and satisfaction
okay so that's what i kind of think of
in terms of healthy bdsm and with sexual
sadism disorder the goal isn't to
pleasure the person in the end it's to
actually like hurt the other person
so the goal here ultimately for bdsm or
healthy bdsm i'd say is pleasure and the
goal for the disorder is to actually to
create suffering like you're trying to
hurt someone
okay
and so let's go through a little bit of
um kind of statistics about the bdsm is
is a non-clinical entity so the
interesting thing is that men tend to
have urges for bdsm starting at less
than 15 years old on average
women on the other hand sort of
recognize their bdsm urges
um usually post puberty so once they're
fully sexually mature like women will
start to have like more bdsm thoughts
okay
um the average person
who sort of recognizes that they're into
bdsm and sort of fully sort of gets it
actually happens in their mid-20s
so what we kind of see is that like real
insight happens like in their mid-20s so
like what you'll see is i guess
statistically you know you'll have like
a 14 year old kid who sort of gets
aroused like maybe watches pornography
that's like a little bit rough
and then
for a woman what you'll tend to see is
that you know they'll start to have like
more thoughts like that
after they're they're done with puberty
and then like by the time you're mid-20s
like you kind of know whether you're
into bdsm or not
and so then kind of
so that's kind of how i think about bdsm
so i think that
um i want to say that one to two percent
of the population
is into bdsm based on some natural
surveys it may be as high as three
percent we're not really sure but it
seems like it's a normal sexual variant
is kind of how i classify it unless it
is crossing into the realm of impairing
function
or really has the intent to like create
suffering
and people may be kind of confused by
this and they may say like what does it
mean to inflict pain as a source of
pleasure
so the best analogy i actually have here
so if we think about negative
experiences right let's so we think
about pain or fear so let's like think
about fear as an analogy generally
speaking fear is not desired
right you don't want to be afraid
but
every year at halloween
a group of people pay money
to get scared and find the experience
pleasurable and that's what we call a
haunted house
right so haunted houses are good
examples
of like willingly engaging in what
appears to be like a negative experience
for the sake of pleasure and it's lots
of fun
so i'm you know hopefully i'm not
offending anyone who's into bdsm or
anything like that but i think that we
have to remember that like for some
people who don't understand this it can
be really confusing that pain would be a
source of pleasure or shame would be a
source of pleasure right if you're a
submissive person
and you want to be humiliated like how
can someone have fun being humiliated
like what the what's that about and so
i'd ask the question how can someone
have fun being afraid and when i'm
talking to people who don't understand
that i find that the haunted house
analogy actually works really well
because it explains to people oh yeah
like i you know i can understand how
like being afraid is actually like can
be fun so in the case of bdsm what we
tend to see is that there's shame
humiliation
pain
domination
even like you know controlling people so
these are like emotions or experiences
that generally speaking or classified as
negative
but when you engage in a consensual
healthy relationship that's like secure
with another person they can actually be
like
pleasurable and completely okay right
and so haunted houses are an analogy of
that
there are other examples i'm sure you
can think of you know where like you
know in relationships like you and your
partner may like try to scare each other
right and that's like kind of fun kind
of not fun you know whatever
um
so now let's talk a little bit about you
know like kind of clinical presentation
and like as a psychiatrist like
what do i see
so the first thing
is you know if you guys are concerned
about where you are on the spectrum i
would say by all means go see a licensed
mental health professional and have them
help you sort it out because that's what
we're here for right we're here to help
you sort out is this a problem is this
not a problem
so i'd say that people tend to present
to my office in a couple of ways one is
that they unfortunately
they get into trouble
i unfortunately have seen my fair share
of this
where people are coming in because
either a court is mandating it or you
know like they did something at school
that they weren't supposed to do or like
you know like they they're just doing
something that they really weren't
supposed to do so they get into trouble
and either some authority figure or some
institution or someone close in their
life basically like forces them to come
the second reason that people
present and so by the way if it gets you
into trouble it's more likely to be
classified as a disorder because it is
causing you real life consequences
second reason that people come in his
partner is uncomfortable
and so like i mentioned earlier so like
a lot of this is like comes from the
partner where the partner's like you
have this kink
they'll judge the person with the kink
and they'll say you need to go get
mental health help because you are a
sicko right so the partner's
uncomfortable with particular things
um sometimes it'll be judgmental
sometimes it won't be judgmental
sometimes it'll be an actual problem
right so this is this is a case where
the patient
has
more interest
in
the fetish
than the partner
so what that sort of means is like the
partner of the patient
sort of feels like objectified and it's
they don't feel like you know they're
having sex with a partner they feel like
they're being like used in some way
and then the third i actually never seen
a case of this now that i think about it
the third reason is that you know a
patient could self-present with concerns
i've just never
you know
um no one i've never had someone with
bdsm self-present i've had people
self-present with concerns about you
know sexual orientation i've had people
self-present with concerns about um you
know sex addiction or porn addiction or
things like that but then the third you
know option is that someone shows up
which maybe some of y'all will do now if
you're you're concerned you'll go seek
mental health help and then you'll try
to figure out you know what's what's
good and what isn't
when it comes to sort of trying to
figure out so once someone shows up in
my office there's a series of kind of
questions that i'll i'll ask right so
i'll ask like when did it start
you know is there any kind of trauma
involved
you know like like you know how much
how intense is it
right so these are like questions that
you know will sort of help me understand
okay so if you've got a foot fetish like
are you able to engage in sexual
activity without feet and you can still
or and you're just kind of turned on by
feet or is it something that like unless
there are feet involved you can't really
engage in sex at all so we'll sort of
ask questions like you know the
intensity of it
um you know is it disruptive in some way
either in terms of your relationships or
things like that
do you have trouble concentrating so
like concentration relationships you
know there are all kinds of ways that it
can be disruptive
so has it negatively impacted your
relationships
are do you have trouble like going about
your day because you are obsessing about
this i have seen actually cases of ocd
masquerading as sexual fetishes before
that's really interesting so it's not
really a sexual fetish fetish but it's
an obsessive
intrusive unwanted thought
which is actually ocd it's not a sexual
fetish at all they're not actually
aroused by it they just keep thinking
about it
and then a lot of times with you know
with the clinical presentation we see a
lot of stuff like shame
what right so like like the the person
who posted
they feel ashamed for having these kinds
of thoughts
and so in terms of how to work with
these people you know i i think a big
part of it is like asking some of these
questions and sort of determining okay
does it negatively impact your life in
some way yes or no
next thing to kind of think about is is
this something that you can engage with
with a partner for the sake of mutual
pleasure
and once you find a partner and you guys
kind of talk things out you sort of
figure out okay what are our safe words
and stuff like that if you're in a
healthy secure relationship where you
can experiment with someone and you know
the purpose of engaging in these
behaviors is for sexual gratification of
both of the parties involved then i i
would call that just a healthy normal
variant of sexual relations it's kind of
interesting because just as i was
preparing for this i looked at the
wikipedia page for bdsm and it was
really interesting to see like you know
cave art from like the 5th century bce
of like you know bondage and domination
and things like that right so like
historically humans have been into this
stuff for like thousands of years
and so
in terms of going back to this actual
person
you know this is what i'd recommend is
that you know i have a submissive kink
and i feel shame for engaging with it so
this i think is something that you
should work on changing so having a
submissive kink is one thing but
remember that the goal here is not for
you to feel ashamed about yourself for
having the kink
it is for you to engage in the shame for
the purpose of like enjoyment
right so if you feel ashamed about a
particular sexual practice
then i would encourage you to go see a
therapist this is something that i'm not
sure that our coaches you know they
haven't gotten any training in this kind
of stuff so i'd see an actual therapist
for this
and so that what what i'm kind of seeing
here is that i have the cycle where you
know i can manage to move my mind away
from the thoughts but then you know they
get control of me so like this doesn't
sound healthy to me
right where you're pushing something out
of your mind and then it forces itself
back in
for the the people who i've worked with
who are in healthy bdsm relationships
it's it's like a part of their day or
their week that they enjoy to engage in
you know they're kind of like looking
forward to it at the end of the week um
even people with a submissive kink who
are into being humiliated
like
you know before and after they feel good
about it right so they're like really
looking forward to it and they'll engage
with their partner and they'll you know
like you know go down to the dungeon
that they have in their basement they'll
do some like really solid bdsm and then
they'll like you know go to bed and the
next morning it's like pancakes with
strawberries and chocolate chips
right so it's like part of a lifestyle
that's like sort of like is healthy
right
so i'd say if if
you know feeling shame is part of your
kink and part of the way that you engage
in pleasure
there seems to be you know the current
prevailing thinking in my personal
opinion is that that is probably a
variant of normal sexual activity
if you're feeling shame about the way
that you feel
or
you know what sexually gratifies you is
not pleasuring another person through
kind of shame and humiliation but if
your actual intent is to like hurt
someone and you mean them like malice
right like if you're malicious and you
really want to like hurt someone then i
really
you know get more concerned about a
disorder
once again you know this is definitely a
situation where like the goal of this is
not to diagnose or treat anything you
know i haven't listed out diagnose for
people who are curious what does
diagnosing this actually look like you
know for each of these things that i'm
sort of sharing each of these has
diagnostic criteria right so there's
like a set of questions that you have to
check certain boxes and then you will
meet diagnostic criteria or you wouldn't
meet diagnostic criteria how people
answer all of these questions and i ask
many many more will ultimately be how
you form a diagnosis so the goal of this
stream is not to diagnose anyone and
what i mean by that is like nothing you
learned on this stream is sufficient for
you to diagnose yourself because the
process of diagnosis is actually like a
more complicated in-depth and thorough
process where you do have to talk about
okay what's the role of trauma is this
sexual sadism disorder or is this the
result of some kinds of emotions that
have come out of trauma so that's like a
good example of like a good diagnostic
process that you need to work through
with a clinician the real goal is just
to explain to people okay so like is
bdsm healthy like what's up with that
what what is healthy what is unhealthy
what is what do those buckets kind of
look like and if that seems kind of
interesting to you or important to you
i'd really recommend you that you go see
a licensed mental health professional
questions
um
yeah so i you know for people kind of
saying interesting stream
so
yeah so there's actually uh there i saw
a study i have i thought i had a
reference let me see if it's
um
so maybe this one
i'm not sure if this is the study
but i think this one
in the background of this paper that i
just linked i think they actually do
point out that there's evidence that uh
couples who engage in bdsm are happier
than couples who don't
not saying that everyone should engage
in bdsm but and i forget exactly what
the population was that may be like
couples that engage in bdsm where one
partner wants to are happier than than
in in other situations so that's
something where you definitely want to
look at the population
right so remember anytime you're looking
at a scientific study
the result
is not the only important thing the
population that you're studying is the
only is like just as important right
so
there are all kinds of results and this
is the problem with like media media
will just share the results they won't
tell you what population you're looking
at so if i were to make the statement
you know couples that engage in bdsm are
healthier than couples who don't
but the population matters are we
talking about all people are we talking
about people who are interested in it so
people who because a lot of these
studies what they'll do is they'll ask
people who self-identify
is having a fetish and then they'll
sample them so if if you take couples
who self-identify as having a fetish
then you look at which ones engage in
behavior and which ones don't what you
find is that people who engage in
behavior are happier than people who
don't but you're talking about everyone
who wants to right so that's that's
uh important distinction and at this
point i'm just rusty on you know which
part because like these studies are like
there's no uniformity so it's like
really hard to remember which study was
looking at what population
um
are people or more people into the
fantasy of bdsm than engaging in it
fifty shades of grey so like we said
right so i think the quebec study was
sampling everyone and that's what's so
interesting about that study is that 44
percent of people voice to desire so i
think it makes sense why 50 shades of
grey like took off so much right because
there's like nearly half of the
population is like interested in kinks
in some way
and then the person was asking are more
people interested in engaging it and
then like like i said so 44 of people
seem interested in some kind of fetish
26 of people have tried it once and like
three percent engage in it regularly so
sort of makes sense right so like fifty
shades of grey was like there's a
there's forty four percent of people are
like sort of into it
um
uh
yeah
so then the other thing that i really
didn't get into with this conversation
is you know there are a lot of like
theories of psychotherapy like freud for
example thought that you know all kinds
of sexual desires were like you know
manifest in weird ways or weird
childhood
experiences early in childhood would
manifest his particular sexual desires
you know sexuality and like edible
complexes and like erotic drives and all
that kind of stuff
you know that's very well represented in
in psychodynamic theory
it's not something i'm an expert in and
it's not something that i've seen great
data about so like i think you can have
all the theories you want is you know
the question is like what about the data
um
and and so from a clinical perspective i
think those can be really useful
so i sometimes think that you know big
part of
freud's emphasis on sexuality
had more to do with freud than it did
with psychotherapy or psychoanalysis
isn't freud regarded as 99 wrong i don't
think that that's a fair way to regard
freud i think what's happened so freud
actually gets a bad rap so here's what
happened with freud
the stuff that freud was was right about
has become such a common part of
thinking that we don't even credit it
for him so any time that you use the
word subconscious or you think about the
subconscious as a concept that's
something that freud should probably get
credit for in terms of popularizing that
idea so what happened with freud is like
his major contributions and the reason
that people like respect him so much is
because he's the first guy that really
laid out the idea that we have a mind
that has a conscious component and like
a not conscious component and that some
of the things that you do consciously
are driven by things that you're not
aware of that central concept which has
been revolutionary for the field of
psychology like you think about you know
everything that we talk about you think
about like you know so much stuff about
subconscious why do we tilt oh it's
because subconsciously this this this
like freud gets some props for that
right because he's the one who really
popularized that concept the other thing
is that freud was quite prolific so i
don't know like percentage-wise i'd say
that most of probably most of what he
wrote is like not widely regarded but
the thing is he he really
he really knocked one out of the park
like he really like struck the jackpot
once with a major concept
that i think we've all sort of like
internalized and accepted as a society